♪
WHAT WOULD HAPPEN IF
CONSUMPTION EVERYWHERE
ON THE PLANET WERE AT
THE SAME LEVEL AS IT IS
IN THE FIRST
WORLD COUNTRIES?
WHAT WOULD HAPPEN IF EVERY
PERSON IN AFRICA AND INDIA
HAD ONE CAR AND
TWO TV SETS?
IF EVERY PERSON
CHANGED THEIR WARDROBE
EVERY SIX MONTHS?
IF EVERY PERSON
WASTED HUNDREDS OF
LITERS OF WATER
ON A DAILY BASIS?
AND EVERY PERSON
HAD A PET
THAT WENT TO THE
PSYCHIATRIST?
NOTHING WOULD HAPPEN
BECAUSE IT IS IMPOSSIBLE
FOR SUCH THINGS
TO EVER HAPPEN.
THE CURRENT SYSTEM OF
PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION
IS UNSUSTAINABLE.
IT'S BASED ON TWO
PRINCIPLES THAT ARE
IMPOSSIBLE TO MAINTAIN
IN THE LONG TERM:
THE INDISCRIMINATE
USE OF RAW MATERIALS
AND THE DIFFICULTY THAT
TWO-THIRDS OF ALL MANKIND
ENCOUNTER WHEN
TRYING TO GAIN ACCESS
TO THE BENEFITS
OF PROGRESS.
THE CURRENT SYSTEM
OF PRODUCTION AND
CONSUMPTION, FAR FROM
LEADING THE WAY TO GLOBAL
DEVELOPMENT, CAUSES MAJOR
ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE
AND INCREASES INEQUALITY
BETWEEN RICH AND POOR.
AT LEAST ONE BILLION
PEOPLE ON THIS PLANET
LIVE IN A WORLD APART
WHICH GETS WORSE EVERY DAY.
ONE OF THE GREATEST
FALLACIES WE ENCOUNTER
WHEN TRYING TO EXPLAIN
THE CAUSES OF POVERTY
AND ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE
IS PUTTING THE BLAME
ON OVERPOPULATION.
THIS IS
SIMPLY NOT TRUE.
JAPAN, FOR EXAMPLE, HAS
MANY MORE INHABITANTS
PER SQUARE KILOMETER THAN
BRAZIL, INDIA OR MEXICO
AND YET ITS OVERPOPULATION
DOESN'T CAUSE MISERY,
MALNUTRITION OR
ECOLOGICAL PROBLEMS.
THE TRUE CAUSES OF
POVERTY AND ENVIRONMENTAL
DETERIORATION ARE
INEQUALITY AND INJUSTICE.
OVER THE LAST FOUR
DECADES AS THE EARTH'S
POPULATION DOUBLED,
FOOD PRODUCTION
HAS INCREASED BY
A FACTOR OF THREE.
THERE'S MORE THAN ENOUGH
FOOD FOR EVERYONE.
EVEN SO, AT THE BEGINNING
OF THE 21ST CENTURY
IT HAS BEEN ESTIMATED
THAT ONE BILLION PEOPLE
ARE UNDERNOURISHED
- A MUCH LARGER NUMBER
THAN JUST FOUR
DECADES AGO.
INEQUALITY AND INJUSTICE
IS EVEN MORE EVIDENT
IN THE USE OF ENERGY SOURCES
AND NATURAL RESOURCES.
DURING THE SECOND HALF
OF THE 20TH CENTURY
THE CONSUMPTION OF
WATER HAS QUADRUPLED
IN FIRST
WORLD COUNTRIES.
EVERY TIME SOMEONE IN
EUROPE OR THE UNITED STATES
FLUSHES THE TOILET
HE'S USING THE SAME
AMOUNT OF WATER THAT
MILLIONS OF FAMILIES
HAVE AT THEIR DISPOSAL
IN THE THIRD WORLD.
OUT-OF-CONTROL
INDUSTRIALIZATION,
WASTE ON IRRIGATION SYSTEMS,
AND THE GENERALIZED
BUT FALSE IDEA THAT WATER
IS AN UNLIMITED RESOURCE
HAVE PAVED THE ROAD FROM
WASTEFULNESS TO SCARCITY.
MEANWHILE 1.1 BILLION
PEOPLE HAVE NO ACCESS
TO RUNNING WATER
AND 2.6 BILLION
LACK ANY KIND OF
SANITATION FACILITIES.
THE USE OF ENERGY IS
ANOTHER CRUCIAL POINT.
INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES
WHICH HAVE ONLY
20% OF THE
GLOBAL POPULATION
USE UP TO 80% OF
THE WORLD'S ENERGY.
IF WE WANT THE WHOLE
OF HUMANITY SHARING OUR
HIGH STANDARDS OF LIFE,
ENERGY CONSUMPTION
WOULD HAVE TO INCREASE
BY A FACTOR OF FIVE.
DO WE HAVE THAT AMOUNT OF
ENERGY AT OUR DISPOSAL
THAT IS CLEAN, SAFE
AND RENEWABLE?
OR TO PUT IT SIMPLY,
DO WE ACTUALLY HAVE
THAT AMOUNT OF ENERGY?
THE ANSWER IS
DEFINITELY NOT.
AFRICA IS THE TRAGIC
CONSEQUENCE OF A SYSTEM
THAT ISN'T ABLE TO OFFER
SOLUTIONS FOR EVERYONE
- A CONTINENT THAT
IS MARGINALIZED BY
INTERNATIONAL
ECONOMIC NETWORKS.
THE UNITED NATIONS
PUBLISHES A YEARLY
DOCUMENT THAT LISTS THE
35 COUNTRIES WITH THE
LOWEST INDEX OF
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT.
27 OF THOSE
ARE IN AFRICA.
THIS INDEX DISPLAYS DATA
ON ALPHABETIZATION,
ACCESS TO WATER, HEALTH CARE,
FOOD AND COMMUNICATION.
IN AFRICA THERE IS
ONLY ONE DOCTOR
FOR EVERY 18,000
INHABITANTS
WHILE IN INDUSTRIALIZED
COUNTRIES
THERE'S ONE
FOR EVERY 300.
THERE ARE 30 MILLION
PEOPLE INFECTED WITH HIV
AND THE VAST MAJORITY
DON'T HAVE ACCESS
TO ANY KIND
OF TREATMENT.
THERE ARE 80 MILLION
CHILDREN WHO ARE
NOT IN SCHOOL.
23 MILLION WHO
ARE MALNOURISHED.
IN THE VAST MAJORITY
OF AFRICAN COUNTRIES
MILITARY EXPENDITURES
ARE TWICE AND THREE TIMES
AS MUCH AS EDUCATION AND
HEALTH CARE EXPENDITURES.
THEIR ECONOMIES
RELY ON SUBSIDIES
BECAUSE THE DEVELOPED
COUNTRIES WOULD RATHER
CLEAR THEIR CONSCIENCES BY
MEANS OF INTERNATIONAL AID
THAN BY OPENING THE
BORDERS TO A JUST
AND BALANCED
COMMERCIAL RELATIONSHIP.
THE PLUNDERING OF
RAW MATERIALS THAT
CHARACTERIZED THE
COLONIAL RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN EUROPE AND
AFRICA DURING THE 19TH
AND 20TH CENTURIES
STILL CONTINUES.
THE ACTORS AND SOME OF
THE METHODS HAVE CHANGED
BUT THE ESSENCE OF THE
SYSTEM REMAINS THE SAME.
FIRST WORLD COMPANIES,
AIDED BY UNFAIR
INTERNATIONAL LAWS
AND LOCAL ELITES,
EXTRACT RAW MATERIALS
WITHOUT ANY KIND OF CONTROL
AND WITH MINIMUM BENEFITS
TO THE NATIVE POPULATIONS.
AS TIME GOES BY,
AFRICAN LANDS
SUFFER MORE AND
MORE DEFORESTATION.
AFFECTED IN THE SAME
MANNER AS THE AMAZON
OR THE INDONESIAN JUNGLES
OR AS MOST JUNGLES
ON THE PLANET, AFRICA
CURRENTLY LOSES THE SAME
AMOUNT OF FOREST THAT IT
LOST DURING THE FIRST HALF
OF THE 20TH CENTURY
EVERY FIVE YEARS
AND RECEIVES
NOTHING IN RETURN.
THE NEW ERA OF
GLOBALIZATION HASN'T
BROUGHT EVEN THE SLIGHTEST
SHIMMER OF HOPE EITHER.
WITH A HUGE GEOGRAPHICAL
EXPANSE AND A POPULATION
THAT CORRESPONDS TO ABOUT
10% OF THE POPULATION
OF THE PLANET,
AFRICA ONLY RECEIVES
ONE PERCENT OF ALL
GLOBAL INVESTMENT.
ONLY THREE COUNTRIES IN
AFRICA - SENEGAL, BOTSWANA
AND SOUTH AFRICA - HAVE
ACCESS TO CAPITAL MARKETS.
THE REMAINING ONES
MUST FINANCE THEMSELVES
BY MEANS OF SO-CALLED
DEVELOPMENT AIDS,
WHICH ARE LOANS IN
DISGUISE THAT MUST BE
REINVESTED IN
THEIR FULL AMOUNT
TO BUY GOODS AND SERVICES
FROM LEADING COUNTRIES
OR IN PROJECTS THAT BENEFIT
COMPANIES OF THESE COUNTRIES
RATHER THAN THE
AFRICAN PEOPLE.
THIS SYSTEM OF AID
SERVES MAINLY TO
ENRICH LOCAL LEADERS
SUPPORTED BY DONORS
WHO USE THEM TO
CLEAR THEIR CONSCIENCES
BUT NOT TO PROMOTE
TRUE DEVELOPMENT.
ONE OF THE REASONS THAT
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
IS AT THE TOP OF ALL
UNDERDEVELOPMENT
STATISTICS LISTS IS
BECAUSE OF ITS POOR
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT.
PRODUCTS ARE NOT
MANUFACTURED IN AFRICA.
RAW MATERIALS ARE NOT
MODIFIED THERE EITHER.
RAW MATERIALS ARE JUST
EXTRACTED AND TAKEN FROM
THE CONTINENT THROUGH
AGREEMENTS THAT BENEFIT
THE LOCAL ELITES AND
INTERNATIONAL COMPANIES.
THE BENEFITS ARE
NOT REINTRODUCED
INTO THE STATE
OR ITS POPULATION.
NATURE IS DESTROYED AND
RESOURCES ARE DIMINISHED
BUT NO NEW JOBS
ARE CREATED.
IN THE IVORY COAST,
COMPANIES FROM ENGLAND,
FRANCE, HOLLAND AND JAPAN
EXPLOIT WOOD RESOURCES
WITHOUT ANY KIND OF
CONTROL AND WITHOUT
DATA BEING GATHERED
ON THE PERCENTAGES
OF PARTICIPATION IN
SUCH EXPLOITATION.
OF COURSE NO ONE EVEN
DISCUSSES THE POSSIBILITY
OF CREATING INDUSTRIES THAT
MANUFACTURE WOOD PRODUCTS
AND GENERATE
EMPLOYMENT LOCALLY.
IN UGANDA THE MONOCULTURE
OF AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS
DESTINED FOR EXPORTATION
HAS SPREAD ON THE MOST
FERTILE GROUNDS TO THE
EXTENT THAT LOCAL FARMERS
CANNOT EVEN PARTICIPATE
IN THE BUSINESS.
ANGOLA, A WAR TORN COUNTRY
THAT HAS MORE BURIED
ANTI-PERSONNEL MINES
THAN INHABITANTS,
RELIES ON
PETROLEUM FOR
50% OF ITS GROSS
INTERNAL PRODUCT.
THERE ARE ALSO GOLD
AND DIAMOND MINES.
THE EXTRACTION OF
THESE RAW MATERIALS
YIELDS MULTI-MILLION
DOLLAR BENEFITS
THAT DON'T STAY
ON THE CONTINENT,
BUT INSTEAD END UP IN
SECRET BANK ACCOUNTS
OR IN THE POCKETS OF LOCAL
AND FOREIGN MIDDLEMEN.
THE WODABE
NOMADS OF NIGER,
LIKE MANY OTHERS
THROUGHOUT THE CONTINENT,
ARE ABANDONING THEIR
TRADITIONAL WAYS OF LIFE
TO MIGRATE TO THE
CAPITAL, NIAMEY.
THEY'RE SEARCHING FOR
SOMETHING AS SIMPLE AS THE
DREAM OF PROGRESS AND
THEY UNDERSTAND THAT
PROGRESS MEANS HAVING A
HEALTH CARE CENTER NEARBY,
A SCHOOL FOR THEIR CHILDREN,
OR A CAR TO COMMUTE IN.
WE'RE NOT THAT
DIFFERENT AFTER ALL.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS ISN'T THE
ONLY THING THAT IS GLOBAL.
BASIC NECESSITIES
ARE ALSO GLOBAL.
WE'RE CREATING A NEW ERA
PLAGUED BY CHALLENGES
AND OPPORTUNITIES THAT
ARE NOT FOR EVERYONE.
TO BUY A COMPUTER IN NIGER
OR MALI A SCHOOL TEACHER
WOULD HAVE TO PAY A FULL
FOUR YEARS' SALARY WHILE
THAT SAME TEACHER IN THE
UNITED STATES OR IN EUROPE
WOULD BUY IT WITH A
SINGLE MONTH'S SALARY.
ONLY .2% OF ALL AFRICANS
HAVE INTERNET ACCESS.
BUT IT'S NOT
NECESSARY TO FOCUS ON
THE INFORMATION
SUPER HIGHWAY.
LET'S PLACE OUR
SITES ON THE HIGHWAYS
OF ASPHALT AND TAR.
ALMOST NO SUB-SAHARAN
COUNTRY HAS A NETWORK
OF HIGHWAYS
THAT FACILITATES
THE TRANSIT OF
PEOPLE AND MERCHANDISE,
A NETWORK THAT ALLOWS
FOR COMMERCE TO OCCUR.
WITHOUT COMMERCE THERE'S
NO PRESENT OR FUTURE AND
WITHOUT IT THE ONLY ROAD
ONE CAN TAKE IS MIGRATION.
WHATEVER DATA WE MAY LOOK
AT - WHETHER IT'S ACCESS
TO EDUCATION, WATER,
HEALTH CARE OR INTERNET,
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA REMAINS
AT THE BOTTOM OF ALL LISTS.
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
AFRICA AND THE REST OF
THE WORLD HAVE
NEVER BEEN SO DIRE.
ANOTHER REGION THAT HAS
A SIMILAR SITUATION
TO SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
IS LATIN AMERICA -
SPECIFICALLY MOST OF ITS
FORTY MILLION INDIGENOUS
INHABITANTS LIVING
IN AWFUL CONDITIONS.
DURING THE PAST DECADES
THESE ETHNIC POPULATIONS
HAVE ACHIEVED GOALS
IN TERMS OF POLITICAL
REPRESENTATION BUT HAVE
MADE LITTLE PROGRESS
ON THE ECONOMIC FRONT.
THEY CONTINUE TO SUFFER
UNDER HIGH LEVELS OF
POVERTY, POOR EDUCATION,
AND A HIGHER INCIDENCE
OF ILLNESS AND
DISCRIMINATION
THAN THE REMAINING
PEOPLE OF LATIN AMERICA.
THEY REPRESENT MORE
THAN 400 ETHNIC GROUPS
WITH THEIR OWN LANGUAGE,
SOCIAL ORDER,
AND UNIQUE VISION
OF THE WORLD.
TRADITIONALLY THEY HAVE
ALSO BEEN THE MOST
AFFECTED POPULATION BY
ENVIRONMENTAL DAMAGE
IN ALL OF
LATIN AMERICA.
IN THE HIGH PLATEAUS OF
THE ANDES, FOR EXAMPLE,
MORE THAN HALF OF THE
TOTAL POPULATION IS POOR.
BUT ALMOST THREE-FOURTHS
OF THE INDIGENOUS
POPULATION LIVES
IN POVERTY.
IN ECUADOR POVERTY RATES
AMONG INDIGENOUS PEOPLE
ARE NEARLY 90%, REACHING
96% IN RURAL AREAS.
IN MEXICO THE INCIDENCE OF
EXTREME POVERTY IN 2002
WAS FIVE TIMES HIGHER
IN MUNICIPALITIES
WITH MOSTLY INDIGENOUS
PEOPLE THAN IN OTHERS.
IN THE PAST DECADES
THERE HASN'T BEEN
ANY KIND OF IMPROVEMENT
IN THE PROBLEM OF
HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
AMONG INDIGENOUS PEOPLE.
TO BE INDIGENOUS IN LATIN
AMERICA IS EQUIVALENT TO
HAVING HIGH PROBABILITIES
OF BEING POOR,
HAVING VERY DIFFICULT
ACCESS TO EDUCATION,
AND EVEN WORSE
TO HEALTH CARE.
IF ON TOP OF ALL THAT
YOU'RE AN INDIGENOUS WOMAN
YOU'LL HAVE THREE TIMES
MORE CHANCES TO DIE
DURING CHILDBIRTH
THAN IF YOU'RE NOT.
AND YOUR CHILDREN
WILL FACE AN
INFANT MORTALITY
RATE 60% HIGHER
THAN THE REMAINING NON
INDIGENOUS POPULATION.
FOR HUNDREDS OF YEARS
THE INDIGENOUS PEOPLE OF
BRAZIL HAVE BEEN VIOLENTLY
DISOWNED FROM THEIR LAND
BY THOSE WHO PRETEND TO
BE THE NEW LANDOWNERS.
AT PRESENT THIS VIOLENCE
CONTINUES WITH THE
PARTICIPATION OF MANY
RIVALING INTERESTS BETWEEN
PETROLEUM PROSPECTORS,
CATTLEMEN, LANDOWNERS,
LUMBER COMPANIES
AND THE MILITARY.
THESE GROUPS ARE VERY
RICH ECONOMICALLY AND
POLITICALLY AND THEY USE
THIS POWER TO DELAY ALL
RESOLUTIONS REGARDING
CONFLICTS OVER LAND.
FOR MANY YEARS THE
INDIGENOUS LEADERS
THAT HAVE HEADED THE
CAMPAIGNS AND ACTIVITIES
TO ACCELERATE THE
TRANSFER OF LAND OWNERSHIP
HAVE RECEIVED DEATH
THREATS AND ARE VICTIMS
OF VIOLENT ATTACKS
AND ASSASSINATIONS.
ON TOP OF THAT THEY
BASICALLY GET
NO PROTECTION
FROM THE STATE.
THE DESTRUCTION OF THE
AMAZON FOREST IS SPEEDING
UP AND ITS INHABITANTS ARE
DISOWNED AND ASSASSINATED
WITHOUT THE EXISTENCE OF ANY
POLITICAL WILL TO STOP IT
- NEITHER A GLOBAL
NOR A LOCAL WILL.
IT'S NOT A SHORT TERM
PRIORITY TO PUT INTO EFFECT
THE RESOURCES THAT WOULD
STOP SUCH A BLOODY TRAGEDY.
IS IT A COINCIDENCE
THAT POVERTY
AND UNDERDEVELOPMENT
EXIST HISTORICALLY
IN CERTAIN REGIONS
OF THE WORLD?
DOES THIS COINCIDENCE
OBEY CLIMATE
AND CULTURE
RELATED REASONS?
OR IS THERE
SOMETHING MORE TO IT?
OUT OF THE 170 ARMED
CONFRONTATIONS THAT HAVE
TAKEN PLACE ON EARTH
AFTER WORLD WAR II,
160 HAVE OCCURRED IN
THIRD WORLD COUNTRIES.
THESE CONFRONTATIONS
HAVE CLAIMED MORE THAN
30 MILLION LIVES AND THE
COUNTING HASN'T STOPPED YET.
IN THE VAST MAJORITY
OF THESE BATTLES
HIDING BEHIND THE FACADE
OF AN INTER-TRIBAL
OR RELIGIOUS CONFRONTATION
WE FIND THE INTERESTS
OF WORLD POWERS AND
MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES.
THE END OF THE COLD WAR
AND VICTORY OF MARKET
ECONOMY OVER COMMUNISM
DIDN'T END THESE WARS.
RATHER THE CONTRARY
HAS HAPPENED.
SINCE THE FALL OF
THE BERLIN WALL
THE PRODUCTION AND
EXPORTATION OF WEAPONS
TO AFRICA, FAR MIDDLE EAST,
AND LATIN AMERICA
HAS INCREASED BY
A FACTOR OF THREE.
THE MANUFACTURERS OF THESE
WEAPONS ARE NOT CONNIVING
MAFIOSI, BUT THE VERY
WESTERN STATES AND
COMPANIES THAT WORK
UNDER THE SUPERVISION
OF COUNTRIES LIKE
GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE,
THE UNITED
STATES, OR SPAIN.
A BLOODY EXAMPLE IS THE ONE
OF ANTI-PERSONNEL MINES.
THESE MINES ARE SPREAD
THROUGHOUT THE THIRD WORLD
LIKE A GRUESOME LEGACY
FOR FUTURE GENERATIONS.
IN CHAD ALONE THERE ARE
ONE MILLION BURIED MINES
THROUGHOUT MOST
OF THE TERRITORY,
MAINLY IN THE NORTHERN
PART OF THE COUNTRY.
IN THIS CASE AS WELL AS
IN THE CASE OF ANGOLA
AND MANY
OTHER COUNTRIES,
THERE'S A SINISTER PARADOX
- THE DOUBLE BUSINESS
OF SELLING AND
DE-ACTIVATING MINES.
THE SAME COUNTRIES
THAT SOLD THEM
ARE NOW IN CHARGE OF
DE-ACTIVATING THEM.
AN ENTIRE COUNTRY LIKE
CHAD IS AFFECTED BY
UNUSED BUT
LIVE AMMUNITION.
THERE ARE MISSILES,
BOMBS, AND GRENADES
THAT ARE AS DANGEROUS
AS THE MINES. IN FACT,
THERE'S MORE UNUSED AND
LIVE AMMUNITION THAN MINES.
TO BUILD AND BURY
A MINE ON THE GROUND
COSTS A FEW DOLLARS.
TO DIG IT OUT AND GET RID
OF IT COSTS MANY THOUSANDS.
BUT THE INVOICES COME
FROM THE SAME ADDRESS.
IN THE MEANTIME THE LAND
IS SOWED WITH HUNGER
AND UNDERDEVELOPMENT.
ALTHOUGH IT IS A WORLDWIDE
PROBLEM, AFRICA IS THE
CONTINENT MOST AFFECTED
BY ARMS TRAFFICKING
AND THE PROLIFERATION
OF TRIBAL WAR.
THERE ARE MORE THAN
100,000 CHILDREN SOLDIERS
IN THE
SUB-SAHARAN REGION.
OF THE 13 MILLION PEOPLE
WHO HAVE DIED IN WARS
DURING THE LAST DECADE
12 MILLION WERE AFRICAN.
EVEN AFTER THE END OF
MOST OF THESE CONFLICTS
AFRICA IS STILL A
VERY DANGEROUS CONTINENT
FOR MOST OF
ITS POPULATION.
I HAVE JUST SURVEYED
4,500 KILOMETERS
OF THE NORTHERN
PART OF THE COUNTRY
AND I'VE TAKEN
HUNDREDS OF PICTURES.
HERE, FOR INSTANCE, IS
A PHOTO OF A PROJECTILE
THAT'S NEAR A HOUSE.
HERE ARE SOME PICTURES
THAT SHOW HOW BEAUTIFUL
THIS COUNTRY IS AND
ALSO WHAT CAN HAPPEN TO
A VEHICLE THAT VENTURES
INTO NO MAN'S LAND.
HERE THERE'S A
MINEFIELD AND A VEHICLE
THAT WAS BLASTED BY
ONE OF THE MINES.
HERE ARE SOME ARROW-SHAPED
PROJECTILES WHICH ARE
VERY DANGEROUS BECAUSE
THEY PACK ROCKETS.
ANY CHILD THAT HITS
IT WHILE PLAYING
WILL LOSE AN
ARM OR HIS LIFE.
THIS IS THE
WADI DUM CAMP
WHICH HAS
MANY OF THEM.
OUR MAIN PRIORITY IS TO
TAKE CARE OF PROJECTILES
FOUND NEAR TOWNS THAT
HAVE CAUSED ACCIDENTS,
MUTILATIONS, DEATHS.
YOU CAN SEE AN EXAMPLE
OF HOW DANGEROUS THIS IS
FOR THE POPULATION.
THIS IS A BMP
LOADED WITH MUNITIONS
AND IT'S RIGHT NEXT
TO THE HOSPITAL.
AND THE BUILDING
BEHIND IS A SCHOOL.
AFTER THE
WARS HAD ENDED,
TANKS ARMED WITH
MUNITIONS WERE ABANDONED.
CHILDREN PLAY HERE AND
IT'S VERY DANGEROUS.
IN GUEREDA
A MUNITIONS DEPOT
BLEW UP IN THE
MIDDLE OF TOWN.
THIS IS WHAT WAS
LEFT OF TWO KIDS
WHO PLAYED WITH
A PROJECTILE.
BOTH OF THEM DIED.
THESE ARE THE TYPES OF
SITUATIONS THAT WE FACE
AND THAT THE POPULATION
KNOWS NOTHING ABOUT.
BESIDES ITS ENORMOUS OIL
RESERVES, AFRICA HAS
TWO-THIRDS OF THE WORLD'S
MINERAL DEPOSITS.
MANY TIMES THE FIGHT IS
NOT FOR CONTROL OF THE
STATE BUT FOR THE CONTROL
OF NATURAL RESOURCES.
IN THE CONGO, LIBERIA,
AND IN THE IVORY COAST
PRIVATE ARMIES OF
MULTINATIONAL COMPANIES
SPONSORED BY THE AMERICAN
AND FRENCH GOVERNMENTS,
AMONG OTHERS, GREATLY
EXPAND THE CONFLICT.
THEY SHOW NO SCRUPLES WHEN
APPROACHING WELL KNOWN
WAR CRIMINALS AND
SUPPLYING THEM WITH WEAPONS
IN ORDER TO SECURE
NATURAL RESOURCES.
WAR IS THE
PRINCIPLE REASON
FOR THE EXPANSION
OF POVERTY.
THE GOVERNMENTS OF THE
FIRST WORLD ALLOCATE
LARGE SUMS TO WHAT THEY
CALL DEVELOPMENTAL AID.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME
THEY EXPAND THE WAR
AND THEREFORE IMPEDE
THAT VERY DEVELOPMENT.
IS THIS A CONTRADICTION?
NO, THEY ARE BOTH SIDES
OF THE SAME BUSINESS.
THIRD WORLD UNDER
DEVELOPMENT AND POVERTY
IS NOT THE PRODUCT
OF CLIMATE OR CULTURE
BUT OF PILLAGING
AND INJUSTICE.
AND IN THIS SYSTEM OF GLOBAL
POVERTY AND INJUSTICE
WOMEN AND CHILDREN
ARE THE BIG LOSERS.
IN RECENT YEARS THE
ENFORCEMENT OF HARSH
NEO-LIBERAL POLICIES HAVE
LED TO CUTS IN EDUCATION
AND HEALTH SPENDING AND
TO AN INCREASE IN THE
IMPUNITY OF MULTINATIONAL
COMPANIES THAT CONDUCT
THEIR BUSINESS WITHOUT
ANY CHECKS AND BALANCES
IN THE THIRD
WORLD COUNTRIES.
THE LAST TWO DECADES
HAVE SEEN AN INCREASE
IN THE NUMBER OF
CHILD LABORERS.
ONE OUT OF EVERY
THREE AFRICAN CHILDREN
AND ONE OUT OF EVERY FIVE
LATIN AMERICAN CHILDREN
IS EMPLOYED.
EVEN IN BUOYANT COUNTRIES
OF THE FAR EAST
THE USE OF CHILDREN FOR
CHEAP LABOR IS CUSTOMARY.
WOMEN AND CHILDREN PERFORM
FAR MORE ARDUOUS TASKS
AND RECEIVE FAR LESS
PAY THAN MEN DO.
IT IS A VICIOUS CYCLE
WHOSE ORIGINS ARE EXTREME
POVERTY, A SCARCITY OF
WORK, AND UNFAIR SALARIES.
A LACK OF INCOME FORCES
PARENTS TO RELY ON
THE WORK OF
THEIR CHILDREN.
WITHOUT THAT INCOME
THE FAMILY INCOME
WOULD COLLAPSE.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME
CHILDREN ARE LEFT
WITHOUT AN EDUCATION
THAT COULD OTHERWISE
SAVE THEM FROM THIS
CYCLE OF MISERY.
ACCORDING TO UNITED
NATIONS' FIGURES
THERE ARE 1.3 BILLION
POOR PEOPLE IN THE WORLD,
70% OF WHICH
ARE WOMEN.
HALF OF THEM ARE
ILLITERATE WHO WILL
NEVER HAVE ACCESS
TO AN EDUCATION.
80 MILLION CHILDREN
LIVE IN THE STREETS
OF SPRAWLING
METROPOLISES.
THERE ARE THOSE
WHO AFFIRM THAT
NEVER IN THE
HISTORY OF MAN
HAVE SO MANY HAD ACCESS TO
THE BENEFITS OF DEVELOPMENT.
IN ABSOLUTE NUMBERS IT IS
AN IRREFUTABLE STATISTIC.
BUT IT IS ALSO TRUE THAT
THERE HAS NEVER BEEN SO
MUCH INEQUALITY BETWEEN
DIFFERENT GROUPS OF PEOPLE.
FOR EXAMPLE, A CHILD BORN
IN MYANMAR IS TWENTY TIMES
AS LIKELY TO DIE
BEFORE HE TURNS FIVE
THAN A CHILD
BORN IN CALIFORNIA.
AND THIS DISPARITY, LIKE
SO MANY OTHERS, FAR FROM
NARROWING, IS GREATER NOW
THAN IT WAS A DECADE AGO.
INDIA IS A UNIQUE EXAMPLE
OF THE RELATIONSHIP
BETWEEN THE PROCESS
OF GLOBALIZATION
AND THE THIRD WORLD.
ACCORDING TO
MICRO-ECONOMIC DATA
INDIA IS GROWING
AND ITS DEVELOPMENT
IS CREATING PROSPERITY.
THAT'S WHAT
THE DATA SAYS.
THE REALITY IS VERY
DIFFERENT, THOUGH,
ESPECIALLY FOR
WOMEN AND CHILDREN.
INDIA HAS ONE OF THE BEST
ARMIES IN THE WORLD
AS WELL AS THE
ATOMIC BOMB.
IT BOASTS ENORMOUS
INVESTMENTS
IN COMPUTER SOFTWARE
AND A FILM INDUSTRY
THAT RIVALS HOLLYWOOD.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME, MORE
THAN 700,000 CHILDREN
UNDER THE AGE OF
FIVE DIE EACH YEAR
FROM DIARRHEA CAUSED
BY A LACK OF HYGIENE,
OF ACCESS TO DRINKING
WATER, AND, IN GENERAL,
OF ACCESS TO
HEALTH CENTERS.
NOTWITHSTANDING A
PROHIBITIVE LAW,
MORE THAN HALF OF ALL
INDIAN WOMEN GET MARRIED
AND HAVE THEIR FIRST CHILD
BEFORE THEY TURN FIFTEEN,
WHICH CAUSES HUGE
GYNECOLOGICAL PROBLEMS.
AS IS THE CASE IN MANY
COUNTRIES OF THE WORLD,
EXTREME POVERTY AND LOW
DEVELOPMENT POSSIBILITIES
HAVE FORCED THE
RURAL POPULATION
TO MIGRATE TO CITIES.
THERE, FAMILIES GATHER IN
POOR QUARTERS OR SLUMS.
THESE GHETTOS WHICH ARE
ESSENTIALLY SHANTY TOWNS
GROW RAPIDLY AND
CHAOTICALLY.
THERE IS NO DRINKING
WATER AVAILABLE
AND EXTREMELY
UNSANITARY CONDITIONS
HELP SPREAD THE
SCOURGE OF DISEASES.
POVERTY AND A SUBSISTENCE
CULTURE ARE THE REASONS
WHY MANY CHILDREN
ABANDON SCHOOL
TO CONTRIBUTE TO
THE FAMILY ECONOMY.
THIS SITUATION IS EVEN
HARSHER FOR GIRLS,
SINCE WOMEN IN INDIA
HAVE BEEN RELEGATED
TO THE LOWEST STRATA
OF SOCIAL LIFE.
BUT WOMEN IN INDIA ARE NOT
THE ONLY VICTIMS OF POVERTY.
THE MASSIVE DISCRIMINATION
THAT TAKES PLACE IN INDIA
IS EVEN MANIFESTED IN
THE RAMPANT KILLING
OF UNBORN FETUSES.
IN 80% OF THE COUNTRY'S
DISTRICTS THE FEMALE
POPULATION HAS PLUMMETED
DRASTICALLY SINCE 1991.
ONE OUT OF EVERY
SIX INDIAN GIRLS
DON'T REACH THEIR
15TH BIRTHDAY.
AND OF THE 12 MILLION
GIRLS BORN EACH YEAR
ONE MILLION DIE BEFORE
THEY'RE TWELVE MONTHS OLD.
THERE ARE ECONOMIC
AND CULTURAL REASONS
TO BLAME FOR THIS.
NOWADAYS COUPLES PLAN ON
HAVING JUST ONE CHILD,
PREFERABLY A BOY.
PARENTS BELIEVE IT IS MORE
PROFITABLE TO INVEST IN
THE EDUCATION OF A SON
SINCE TRADITIONALLY
A GIRL WILL GO LIVE WITH
HER HUSBAND'S FAMILY
AFTER THE WEDDING.
THIS ECONOMIC YET
MACABRE LOGIC
IS THE CAUSE OF MILLIONS
OF FEMALE DEATHS.
INDIA PRESENTS
AN EXTREME CASE,
THOUGH IT IS BY NO
MEANS EXCEPTIONAL.
ROUTINE KILLINGS OF WOMEN
OCCUR ACROSS THE GLOBE,
ESPECIALLY IN
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES.
THERE ARE MANY CAUSES BUT
THE GREAT EVIL BEHIND
THESE HORRIFIC ACTS
IS ALWAYS THE SAME -
MALE CHAUVINISM AND THE
DESIRE TO POSSESS WOMEN.
DOES THE INDIAN GOVERNMENT
- OR ANY OTHER FOR THAT
MATTER - FIGHT AGAINST
THE KILLING OF WOMEN
WITH THE SAME
INTENSITY AS IT DOES
AGAINST, FOR
INSTANCE, TERRORISM?
WITHOUT A DOUBT, NO.
AND THE DATA IS
DISHEARTENING.
IN RECENT YEARS DEATHS
DUE TO TERRORISM CAN BE
COUNTED IN THE THOUSANDS
WHILE FEMICIDES
CAN BE COUNTED IN THE
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS.
IN THE YEAR 2000, 189
COUNTRIES SIGNED THE
U.N.-SPONSORED
MILLENNIUM OBJECTIVES.
THERE WERE SEVEN
SUCH OBJECTIVES:
THE ERADICATION
OF EXTREME POVERTY,
UNIVERSAL PRIMARY
EDUCATION, GENDER EQUALITY,
A REDUCTION IN
INFANT MORTALITY RATES,
MATERNAL HEALTH,
THE FIGHT AGAINST AIDS,
AND SUSTAINABLE
ENVIRONMENTAL DEVELOPMENT,
PLUS ACCESS TO WATER.
IN ORDER TO ACCOMPLISH
THESE, AN EIGHTH ENTRY
WAS CREATED CALLED
"ALLIANCE FOR DEVELOPMENT".
ACCORDING TO
THIS LAST POINT
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
WOULD INCREASE THEIR AID,
WOULD REDUCE THE EXTERNAL
DEBT OF POOR COUNTRIES,
AND WOULD REGULATE COMMERCE
SO THAT THEIR MARKETS
COULD BE OPEN TO THESE
LESS ADVANTAGED NATIONS.
THE DEADLINE SET
FOR THESE OBJECTIVES
WAS THE YEAR 2015.
WE CAN ALREADY ASSERT
THAT THEY WILL NOT BE
ACCOMPLISHED BY THEN.
THERE IS SOME DATA
THAT OFFERS HOPE -
SOME PARTIAL
VICTORIES IN COUNTRIES
SUCH AS
CHINA AND INDIA.
BUT WE ARE VERY
FAR FROM ACHIEVING
EVEN MODEST RESULTS.
AFRICA HAS
BECOME STAGNANT.
THERE ARE STILL
11 MILLION CHILDREN
DYING BEFORE THE AGE
OF FIVE IN THE WORLD
AND IN AFRICA THIS
MORTALITY RATE
HAS INCREASED
SINCE THE 1990'S.
IN SOME PARTS
OF LATIN AMERICA
POVERTY DOES NOT
DECREASE, IT INCREASES.
TODAY EXPERTS AGREE THAT
THERE ARE SOLUTIONS TO THE
PROBLEMS OF DEVELOPMENT
AND THAT THE MILLENNIUM
OBJECTIVES ARE TECHNICALLY
AND ECONOMICALLY VIABLE.
ALL THAT IS NEEDED IS THE
POLITICAL WILL OF NATIONS.
GOVERNMENTS OF
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
MUST STRENGTHEN HUMAN
RIGHTS AND FIGHT CORRUPTION.
RICHER GOVERNMENTS MUST
SIMPLY HONOR WHAT THEY'VE
AGREED TO AND HONOR THEIR
HISTORIC RESPONSIBILITY.
SOMETHING THAT
HAS YET TO OCCUR.
EXTERNAL DEBT STILL
DROWNS MANY COUNTRIES.
FAIR TRADE NORMS ARE STILL
UP IN THE AIR AND THE
NECESSARY INVESTMENTS
HAVE NOT TAKEN PLACE.
THE U.N. INSISTS THAT
RICH COUNTRIES MUST
DOUBLE THE AID THEY
CURRENTLY GIVE IN ORDER TO
ACCOMPLISH THE MILLENNIUM
OBJECTIVES BY 2025.
AT THE CURRENT PACE
SOME OF THE OBJECTIVES
WON'T BE ACCOMPLISHED
UNTIL 2150.
AID MUST BE
INCREASED, YES.
AND IT IS ALSO TRUE
THAT THE CONCEPT OF
HOW AID IS USED
MUST BE CLARIFIED.
BUT THE KEY TO
REAL GROWTH IS IN THE
REGULATORY SYSTEM OF
INTERNATIONAL TRADE.
IT IS INDISPENSABLE TO
FREE UP OPPORTUNITIES
SO THAT POORER ECONOMIES
CAN EXPORT THEIR PRODUCTS.
AID IS A NECESSARY
QUICK FIX
BUT COMMERCE CREATES
LASTING OPPORTUNITY.
GRANTING DEVELOPING NATIONS
ACCESS TO DECISION MAKING
FORUMS IN THE WORLD
TRADE ORGANIZATION
IS ABSOLUTELY NECESSARY.
SOME COUNTRIES HAVE
ALREADY ACHIEVED THIS
WITH GOOD RESULTS.
BUT MOST ARE
LAGGING BEHIND,
ESPECIALLY THOSE IN
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA.
EVERY DAY MORE PEOPLE
IN MORE COUNTRIES
DEMAND THE SAME
LIFESTYLE THEY SEE ON TV,
THE SAME CAR MODELS
AND CLOTHING BRANDS.
EVERY DAY MORE PEOPLE
ASPIRE TO EAT MEAT
ON A DAILY BASIS,
TO SHOWER DAILY,
AND TO TRAVEL BY PLANE
TO VISIT THEIR FAMILIES.
IT IS NOT NECESSARY
FOR THE POPULATION
TO CONTINUE GROWING,
ALTHOUGH WITH MORE
THAN SIX BILLION PEOPLE
POPULATION GROWTH
IS ALMOST INEVITABLE.
AND IF ONLY BRAZIL,
INDIA AND CHINA
- THREE HEAVILY POPULATED
COUNTRIES ON THE RISE -
CREATE ACCESS TO
MARKET ECONOMIES,
THE RESULTING
ENVIRONMENTAL HARM
COULD BE DEFINITE
AND IRREPARABLE.
THE DILEMMA IS IN COVERING
THE NEEDS OF THE BILLIONS
OF NEEDY WITHOUT EXCEEDING
THE PLANET'S ECOLOGICAL
LIMITS WHILE UNDOING
PATTERNS OF INEQUALITY
AND DISTRIBUTING WEALTH IN
A MORE BALANCED FASHION.
HOW DO WE FACE THE
CHALLENGE OF THE DEVELOPMENT
OF THREE QUARTERS OF
THE WORLD'S POPULATION
WITHOUT EXCEEDING
ECOLOGICAL LIMITS?
THE SOLUTION IS NOT
SIMPLE, BUT IT MUST
INVOLVE SOME SORT OF
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
THAT GUARANTEES ACCESS
TO PROPERTY FOR THE POOR
AS WELL AS
TO EDUCATION
AND TRANSPORTATION
INFRASTRUCTURE.
SHORING UP CONFIDENCE
IN BALANCED COMMERCIAL
COMPETITION AND PROTECTING
THE RIGHTS OF WORKERS
WHILE SAFEGUARDING
THE ENVIRONMENT
ARE ALSO ESSENTIAL
PRIORITIES.
AND WHAT MUST FIRST
WORLD CITIZENS DO?
THE SOLUTION
IS IN OUR HANDS,
IN THE DECISIONS WE MAKE,
IN THE VOTES WE CAST.
NOWADAYS, FROM A PURELY
TECHNOLOGICAL STANDPOINT,
THESE OBJECTIVES
ARE REACHABLE.
TO MAKE THEM A REALITY IS
A QUESTION OF POLITICAL
AND PERSONAL WILL
AND A REALIZATION
THAT THE BIGGEST
DANGER HUMANITY FACES
IS NOT TERRORISM
OR DRUG TRAFFICKING
BUT POVERTY AND
ENVIRONMENTAL DETERIORATION.
LET US CHANGE THE
WAY WE CONSUME.
LET'S USE MORE PUBLIC
TRANSPORTATION.
LET'S RELY MORE ON
RENEWABLE ENERGY SOURCES.
LET'S PRESSURE OUR
GOVERNMENTS INTO
UNDERSTANDING THAT
AID FOR DEVELOPMENT
IS NOT JUST A PROCESS
TO CLEAR OUR CONSCIENCE.
LET'S ACCEPT THAT IT IS
NOT ABSOLUTELY NECESSARY
TO OWN TWO HOMES, THREE
CARS, FOUR TV SETS AND TO
CHANGE CELL PHONES OR
COMPUTERS EVERY SIX MONTHS.
LET'S CONSUME
- NAY, LET'S LIVE -
IN A SUSTAINABLE
FASHION.
ON THE STREETS OF GREAT
FIRST WORLD METROPOLIS
THE MISERY IN AFRICA
OR THE DETERIORATION
OF RIVERS,
SEAS AND FARMLAND
MIGHT SEEM LIKE
A REMOTE PROBLEM.
BUT NOTHING IS FURTHER
FROM THE TRUTH.
PESTICIDES THAT
CONTAMINATE FARMLANDS
OR PANDEMIC DISEASES
SUCH AS AIDS IN AFRICA
HAVE IMMEDIATE CONSEQUENCES
ON OUR DAILY LIVES.
AND IT ISN'T EVEN
A QUESTION ANYMORE
OF SOLIDARITY WITH
OTHER HUMAN BEINGS
BUT, IF YOU WILL,
OF SELF-PROTECTION.
IF WE ARE INCAPABLE
OF JUMP STARTING
THE MECHANISMS THAT
WILL ALLOW TWO-THIRDS
OF THE POPULATION
TO BECOME DEVELOPED
AND IF THAT DEVELOPMENT
IS NOT SUSTAINABLE,
WHAT IS AT
STAKE IS NOT THE
TYPE OF FUTURE
WE ARE FORGING
BUT THE VERY FUTURE
OF OUR SPECIES.